Rate Limit Page Overhaul (#1167)
letsencrypt/website: content/en/docs/rate-limits.md

slug: rate-limits
top_graphic: 1
date: 2018-01-04

> lastmod: 2020-12-11

Reviewer: One last update pre-merge?

Author: I'm not understanding. Did I not modify the lastmod date correctly?

I think maybe your joking with me about my willingness to make another modification. If so, yeah, I'm willing to modify. 😊

are integrating Let's Encrypt into your operations, please review our [Integration Guide](/docs/integration-guide)
to ensure smooth operation. In particular, we recommend using one ACME account for many
customers. If you are developing an ACME client or debugging the usage of one, please
take advantage of our [staging environment](/docs/staging-environment), which is
governed by higher rate limits and issues false certificates.

We have no way of temporarily overriding the rate limits. For very large providers who are
encountering rate limits due to sheer volume, we provide a [rate limiting form](https://goo.gl/forms/plqRgFVnZbdGhE9n1)
that can be used to request higher rate limits. Since these requests can take several weeks
to process, the form is not suitable for addressing temporary situations that will
automatically be resolved when any encountered rate limits no longer apply.

Revoked certificates still count against our rate limits and remain in the public record.
All issued certificates can be found using [crt.sh](https://crt.sh/), which uses public
[Certificate Transparency](https://www.certificate-transparency.org) logs. In general,

> certificate revocation should only be considered under extreme circumstances, such as the

Reviewer: Maybe ‘abnormal’ or ‘non-routine’ rather than ‘extreme’?

Author: maybe "very special"? 🤔

I liken certificate revocations to exorcisms... oft-talked about with lack of correct knowledge and exceedingly-rarely applied under appropriate circumstances in practical reality.

Author: changed "extreme" to "very particular"

# Definitions

<span id="duplicate-certificate">Duplicate Certificate</span>

A certificate is considered a duplicate if it contains the exact same <a href="#SAN">SANs</a>
as another certificate, regardless of order. Renewal certificates are duplicate certificates.

***

<span id="FQDN">Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN)</span>

An FQDN is a complete domain name consisting of any subdomain names and an
<a href="#apex-domain-name">apex domain name</a>.

***

<span id="apex-domain-name">Apex Domain Name</span>

An apex domain name is usually the trailing part of an <a href="#FQDN">FQDN</a> registered through
a registrar. For instance, `example.com` is the apex domain name of `www.example.com`.
We use the [Public Suffix List](https://publicsuffix.org) to determine the apex domain
name for any given <a href="#FQDN">FQDN</a>.

***

<span id="SAN">Subject Alternative Name (SAN)</span>

Each <a href="#FQDN">FQDN</a> that a certificate covers is listed as a SAN in the certificate.
A certificate with multiple SANs is sometimes called a unified communications certificate (UCC).
Reducing the number of SANs in a certificate reduces the operational complexity associated with

> using the certificate, resulting in increased performance and reliability.

Reviewer: This seems a bit editorial, on the subject of having more certs / fewer names/cert being more performant. It reduces the size, though, which makes handshakes smaller, which would be a noncontroversial remark.

Author: This is taken directly from the currently-published page:
"Note: For performance and reliability reasons, it’s better to use fewer names per certificate whenever you can."

I just wrote "operational complexity" to cover broad ground, including, but not mentioned, such complexities as revocation of a certificate loaded with a massive number of SANS causing operational disaster. This is akin to the situation of a single certificate with multiple SANs for domains being hosted on separate machines sharing a single private key. The practical operational complexity (and security risk) associated with managing a shared private private key is greater than simply using multiple certificates with fewer SANs.

I guess I just don't see anything especially controversial about my revision:
"Reducing the number of SANs in a certificate reduces the operational complexity associated with using the certificate, resulting in increased performance and reliability."

Reviewer: I simply remember the prior uphill battles about ACME automation encouraging individual certs running into older automations encouraging one cert per host.  I don't want my nitpicking over battles long since won to hold up the rest of this very excellent change, but I'm also not sure I should be approving here, so tagging @aarongable for final review.

Author: Aaron already knows and has let me know that some others want to review too. Thanks for taking the time and giving good input. 😊

slug: rate-limits
top_graphic: 1
date: 2018-01-04
lastmod: 2020-12-16
---

{{< lastmod >}}

# Foreword

> To ensure fair usage, Let's Encrypt enforces rate limits that we believe to be

Author: Definitely.

reasonable for most scenarios. Our rate limits were designed to facilitate unhampered

> certificate renewals and progressive certificate usage by large organizations. If you

Author: That's the definition of progressive:
* Moving forward; advancing
* Proceeding in steps; continuing steadily by increments
* Tending to become more severe or wider in scope

Are we concerned that the word might offend someone due to political context?

> certificate renewals and progressive certificate usage by large organizations. If you

Reviewer 2: I do suspect the political meaning is becoming more widespread in the U.S. than the "gradual" meaning, but I also think that "progressive certificate usage" might be too broad to get people to think of the idea of *incremental adoption by each individual organization for more and more of its own subdomains* (as opposed to something like "adoption by more and more *kinds* of organizations" or whatever). My goal is just to to try to emphasize that what's meant here is that the reader's organization can gradually protect more and more of its own subdomains, as long as it doesn't try to issue for a huge number all at once. I'm not positive what the best concise way to get that across that is!

> are integrating Let's Encrypt into your operations, please review our [Integration Guide](/docs/integration-guide)

Author: Fair point. I figure that the knowledge doesn't hurt anyone. It's not like most of the integration guide is only valuable for huge organizations.

to ensure smooth operation. In particular, we recommend using one ACME account for many
customers. If you are developing an ACME client, debugging the usage of one, or configuring
an automated system, please take advantage of our [staging environment](/docs/staging-environment),

> which is governed by higher rate limits and issues false certificates.

Author: Good point. I'll try to clarify this.

> We have no way of temporarily overriding the rate limits. For very large providers who are

Author: I feel like those options are the rather-obvious default. 😉 I could state them, but I feel that it's a bit like warning people that they will get wet if they fall off the ship.

encountering rate limits due to sheer volume, we provide a [rate limiting form](https://goo.gl/forms/plqRgFVnZbdGhE9n1)
that can be used to request higher rate limits. Since these requests can take several weeks

> to process, the form is not suitable for addressing temporary situations that will

Author: I'll add a "justification" clause

> to process, the form is not suitable for addressing temporary situations that will

Reviewer 2: By the way, I really like the clear statement that these adjustments may take weeks and, for a temporary problem, aren't faster than just waiting for the rate limit to reset. That's something people on the forum are really often missing, and this is a great reminder or explanation for those people.

automatically be resolved when any encountered rate limits no longer apply.

Revoked certificates still count against our rate limits and remain in the public record.

> All issued certificates can be found using [crt.sh](https://crt.sh/), which uses public

Author: I had this discussion with @osirisinferi a while back. 😄 Considering who is the sponsor of [Let's Encrypt's transparency logs ](https://letsencrypt.org/docs/ct-logs/), the fact that the all of the [root and intermediate certificate links](https://letsencrypt.org/certificates/) are to crt.sh (per my own effort), and that crt.sh was already mentioned in the previous version of the page, I didn't feel like offering other options was really necessary. I'm open to the possibility though if it seems prudent.

> All issued certificates can be found using [crt.sh](https://crt.sh/), which uses public

Reviewer 3: Note that crt.sh does actually sometimes suffer from a backlog due to performance reasons. That said, so did Google one day when crt.sh wasn't uptodate.. So I thought it wasn't a backlog issue, as crt.sh and Google didn't have a recent certificate.. But then someone came with a *third* CT log aggregator which *did* have a recent cert on file..
So, crt.sh isn't ideal due to sometimes performance reasons, nor is Google apparently. I'll try to see if I can find the name of that third option.

> All issued certificates can be found using [crt.sh](https://crt.sh/), which uses public

Reviewer 4: If the point here is just that "it's all still in a the public record", it might be best to just reference the Certificate Transparency concept as a whole (that there are many distributed logs used to track that Certificate Authorities are following the rules) rather than making it seem like some particular log aggregator is the be-all reference point. The only real "official site" I know for it is https://www.certificate-transparency.org which may not really handle well explaining to the "general public" (and parts of it haven't really been updated to explain that it's now standard). Maybe it should just link to https://letsencrypt.org/docs/ct-logs/ (and maybe that page itself could use some updates at some point too)?

> All issued certificates can be found using [crt.sh](https://crt.sh/), which uses public

Author: Thanks for the feedback guys. Good to see you. 🙂

I know that crt.sh can be flaky sometimes, but it is far and away the most commonly-referenced aggregator mentioned on both Let's Encrypt's website and community. It's simply being mentioned here as **a** tool in the same way it was in the existing page, not as an advertisement for **the** tool. The utility provided by crt.sh here is more than just to show the theoretical concept of certificate transparency though. It is also meant to lower the defenses of certificate-seekers in terms of information sharing by letting them see with their own eyes that their certificate activities are not private affairs.

I fully concur about the link switch,  @petercooperjr. There's no loss since the current link is already on /docs/ct-logs anyhow.

[Certificate Transparency](https://www.certificate-transparency.org) logs. In general,
certificate revocation should only be considered under very particular circumstances, such as the

> compromise of a certificate's private key. Securely deleting a certificate's private key

Author: Fair enough. I'll add it.

> is usually sufficient to decommission the certificate due to perfect forward secrecy.

Author: Now that you mention it, my PFS line is exactly wrong. 😱 I well change this for sure.

Revocation of a certificate only invalidates its trust for future use.

# Rate Limits

Message: too many certificates already issued for exact set of domains

Limit: 5 <a href="#duplicate-certificate">duplicate certificates</a> / 7 days

Hitting this limit is often the result of using the following practices that should be avoided:
* Deleting valid certificates (and their private keys) when attempting to resolve webserver configuration problems

> * Spinning-up ephemeral instances that acquire new certificates from the CA rather than utilizing an existing certificate

Author: I concur on both points.

***

Message: too many failed authorizations recently

Limit: 5 failed validation attempts / <a href="#FQDN">FQDN</a> / ACME account / hour

Hitting this limit is often the result of:

> * Improper webserver or DNS configuration

Author: Yep.

* Misunderstanding of an [ACME challenge](/docs/challenge-types)

***

Message: too many certificates already issued

Limit: 50 certificates / <a href="#apex-domain-name">apex domain name</a> / week

<a href="#duplicate-certificate">Duplicate certificates</a> do **not** count against this limit.

> 

Author: I actually kinda sidestepped a similar wording in the previous document to discourage such practices. The PSL is already mentioned previously. If any clarification were needed I'd like it to be in the foreword to keep from polluting the definitions with footnote solutions. For what it's worth, I was trying to separate the caveats and practices from the terms and debugging as much as possible. 😕

***

Limit: 100 <a href="#SAN">SANs</a> / certificate

> 

Author: Good idea.

***

Message: too many new orders recently

Limit: 300 new orders / ACME account / 3 hours

If a new order is requested and there already exists a pending order covering the exact same
<a href="#FQDN">FQDNs</a>, the pending order will be returned and a new order will **not**
be created.

> 

Reviewer 2: How about something like this?

> This limit may be reached due to a client software bug or due to overly-aggressive efforts to parallelize a high volume of certificate issuance. Most users should simply decrease the parallelism of their certificate requests, or arrange for certificate requests by separate parts of their organizations to use separate ACME accounts. If you are a large hosting provider and reach this limit in the course of legitimate and otherwise successful certificate issuance on behalf of your customers, you may contact Let's Encrypt to discuss your situation.

Author: I never really considered that aspect. I've personally encountered this a lot with simple ACME client scripts that submit a new order matching the pending order upon a nonce timeout.

***

Message: too many registrations for this IP

> Limit: 10 ACME account registrations / IP address / 3 hours

Author: Is this only limited to IPv4?

***

Message: too many registrations for this IP range

Limit: 500 ACME account registrations / IPv6/48 range / 3 hours

***

Message: too many currently pending authorizations

Limit: 300 pending authorizations / ACME account

Hitting this limit is usually the result of a malfunctioning ACME client.

> If you know the URL of a pending authorization of the form `/acme/authz/XYZ`, which can likely

Reviewer 2: Heh, I guess a version of this is already present in the old version!

> If you know the URL of a pending authorization of the form `/acme/authz/XYZ`, which can likely

Author: Your first comment was my initial thought and your second comment was my response to your first comment. 😆

be found in the log of your ACME client, you can trigger a validation attempt for that
authorization by submitting a JWS-signed POST request to any of its challenges as described in
the [ACME specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8555#section-7.5.1). Regardless of the
outcome of the validation attempt, the authorization will no longer be pending.

***

Limit: 20 requests / second

Hitting this limit is usually the result of a malfunctioning ACME client.
This limit applies collectively to requests for the "new-reg", "new-authz", and "new-cert"
ACMEv1 API endpoints and the "new-nonce", "new-account", "new-order", and "revoke-cert"
ACMEv2 API endpoints.

***

Limit: 40 requests / second

Hitting this limit is usually the result of a malfunctioning ACME client.
This limit applies collectively to requests for the "/directory" endpoint and the "/acme" 
directory and subdirectories.

# Definitions

<span id="duplicate-certificate">Duplicate Certificate</span>

A certificate is considered a duplicate if it contains the exact same <a href="#SAN">SANs</a>

> as another certificate, regardless of order. Renewal certificates are duplicate certificates.

Author: I'll work on this.

slug: rate-limits
top_graphic: 1
date: 2018-01-04
lastmod: 2020-12-22
---

{{< lastmod >}}

# Foreword

> Although Let's Encrypt offers SSL/TLS certificates free of charge, unfortunately

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Although Let's Encrypt offers SSL/TLS certificates free of charge, be aware that
```

Just being real nitpicky here, so feel free to ignore me, but the word "unfortunately" rubbed me the wrong way. I mean, it's a *good* thing that there are HSMs and OCSP servers and audits involved, right? It just seems like just informing people that "there's no such thing as a free lunch" in that even if they're not paying for it, *someone* is, makes more sense to me, rather than it being just "gee it sucks that you're use those resources". But I'm sure a better wordsmith than I could do better.

Author: Not a bad suggestion. I chose "unfortunately" to emphasize the negativity of the cost of producing certificates. You seem to have found a very different perspective than I was intending, so I just want to be sure you were reading it correctly first. The intention was to garner empathy for Let's Encrypt to generate respect for the organization and its resources. I'm a little concerned that "be aware that" might come across as foreboding. I walked a bit of a tightrope in trying to balance justification of the policing-nature of this page with welcoming altruism. I'm not sure how well I succeeded though.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I'm not really thrilled with my wording either. I guess it's just that, as a *user* of the web, it's a good thing that there are so many checks and balances on certificate issuance by a trusted CA, which while it'd be great if that were inherently free, it obviously has *some* costs that *somebody* has to pay. So I was trying to move emphasis from "gee it's a shame that it costs resources to do this service" even more to "it's great that we have sponsors and donors to provide this service to you". Which I guess is what's in the following lines anyway, so perhaps this is just my weird brain that saw something odd about it.
